history TV sits in on a lecture with one
of the nation's college professors up
next professor Kenneth Osgood looks at
the CIA's efforts to overthrow leaders
in other countries during the Cold War
all right good morning everyone and
thank you as you can see from the screen
here the title of my lecture today is
called the CIA and regime change in the
Cold War and I'm basically looking at
and I'll be talking about efforts by the
US intelligence service the Central
Intelligence Agency to overthrow foreign
governments during the Cold War period
and I'll be asking questions about what
this means but I'd like to do things and
kind of sort of start things in kind of
an unusual way historians as you can
imagine we like to tell things in
chronological order we like to start at
the beginning and end at the end it
makes writing a history paper very easy
because you know where you start and you
know where you're in but I like to do
things a little bit differently today
and I'd like to jump across time and
space so I'm actually going to begin in
2001 now you guys are all a little bit
younger than I am but I think you're
probably still old enough to have had a
powerful memory of the events of
September 11th 2001 how many you guys
remember that that event how many of you
guys or and women remember where you
were what you were doing right I
remember the start of that day vividly
right now we Americans are not the only
people to have a sort of September 11th
in their national story in Santiago
Chile there was a September 11th event
that had a dramatic impact on Chilean
history and Chilean memory on that day
in 1973 military officers from the
Chilean army and their units staged a
full-scale assault on their own country
they took over radio stations police
stations and other centers of power in
Santiago they stormed the presidential
palace basically the Chilean White House
charged through guns blazing and when
they were done the President of Chile
was dead these events on September 11th
for Chile began a reign of terror led by
an army general named Augusto Pinochet
Pinochet regime remained in power for 17
years and was responsible for torture
murder and repression and what most
Chileans did not know in 1973 and what
many Americans still do not know was
that the coup of September 11th 1973 was
the work of intelligence operatives
American intelligence operatives and
they took their orders directly from the
White House let's fast forward to 1998
in London Augusto Pinochet was by now 82
years old coming on a short trip to
London he found himself arrested the
charge crimes against humanity including
dozens of counts of torture
now let's flashback and go back a few
years to 1979 on November 4th a hoard of
Iranian students and protesters stormed
the American Embassy in Tehran the
capital of Iran as they broke through
the embassy compound American diplomats
were shredding documents so fast that
their shredder broke right as the events
unfolded 53 American officials were
taken hostage in a standoff that lasted
444 days and Americans sort of watched
this crisis unfold every night on the
nightly news right and as Americans sort
of watched this event drag on throughout
the last years of the Jimmy Carter
presidency Iranians who were holding the
Americans hostage in Iran had a
different hobby they assembled the most
complex jigsaw puzzle perhaps in human
history they took the shredded documents
in the US Embassy and reassembled them
and actually if you sort of look up the
technological history of the shredder
you'll learn that because of this event
they learned that they need to crosscut
this reading very important his moment
in the history of technology now what
these documents revealed and they
revealed something that the Iranians
already knew but most Americans did not
know and they were supported by secret
documents in
and that was that in 1953 the Central
Intelligence Agency overthrew the
popular and democratically elected prime
minister of Iran and in his place they
installed or sort of reinstalled a
Royalist dictator who ruled the country
with an iron fist for 26 years let's
shift gears again and move again across
time and space and we'll stop oh sorry
skip that one
Guatemala City 1955 then Vice President
Richard Nixon was meeting with the head
of Guatemalan government Colonel caught
Colonel Castillo Armas in the US
government sort of commemorate us too as
part of his friendship tour to Latin
America and so the u.s. gummer
government commemorated his trip by
making a documentary film that they
distributed throughout the region and
the film was called Guatemala makes a
friend and I've often sort of thought of
this film and wondered to myself that
sort of reminded myself of that old
cliche with friends like these anyone
care to repeat the second half who needs
enemies right skip back a year Guatemala
in 1954 about a decade before this
Guatemala began moving into a new period
of democratic reform in 1944 there was a
popular uprising that swept aside a very
unpopular but pro-american dictator
shortly thereafter for the first time in
Guatemala's history the country held
democratic elections but this Democratic
uprising this I mean sort of democratic
spring was cut short by a military coup
the coup that plunged Guatemala into a
dark and turbulent period of dictatorial
rule and civil war was engineered by the
Central Intelligence Agency with orders
from the American president in the
decades following that coup there was a
tremendous period of repression civil
war and chaos over 200,000 victims died
as a result of the pression that
repression that followed indeed in 1983
we
recovered subsequently this document
from 1983 perhaps the most sort of grim
log in existing in the historical record
right detailed recounting of the victims
of the Guatemalan secret police which
was in fact trained and equipped by US
military forces and by intelligence
agents these kind of events obviously
raised troubling questions for Americans
seeking to make sense of their history
Americans like to believe that we stand
for freedom and democracy and that
American foreign policy puts forth these
goals of freedom and democracy right
these are the tenants of Wilsonian ISM
that we talked about earlier in the
semester right the idea that the United
States would be the supporter of
self-determination right and these ideas
are sort of embedded in the American
view of the world when we sort of look
at these kinds of events we we ask
ourselves what do they mean what can we
make sense of this how do they fit into
our national story are these should we
view them as sort of aberrations are
these just brief moments where the
United States caught a flu and did
something crazy and then kind of sobered
up or mixing seventeen metaphors oh is
it sad another one was a sort of a typo
in the history of the American story
or was it part of a larger pattern well
let's take a look merely at the CIA's
connection to this pattern right in 1948
the CIA was involved in basically
distributing huge tons of cash to
favored candidates in the elections in
France in Italy
1951 and 54 organized regime change in
Iran in Guatemala in 57 it tried but
failed to organize regime change and
engaged in all sort of electoral bribery
in Syria in Indonesia 1958 to 1963 the
agency was involved in a plan to
destabilize the regime in Iraq and
possibly the details are very very murky
but possibly evolved in an assassination
plot that involved actually a very young
and at the time mostly insignificant
thug by the name of Saddam Hussein 1961
to 1962 1961 there were azim change
plots and assassination plots in the
Congo and Dominican
like for 3-4 years the United States
tried and failed repeatedly to overthrow
the regime of Fidel Castro in Cuba money
was sent to favorite candidates to help
favorite candidates during elections in
Brazil there were regime change plots in
British Guiana and Haiti from 1954 to
1963 the CIA and other parts of the US
government helped to install prop up and
then remove the president of South
Vietnam events that were absolutely a
central to laying the groundwork for
what would become the Vietnam War as
we'll talk about later this semester
1950s into the 1970s the agency
distributed huge subsidies to favored
candidates in the Liberal Democratic
Party in Japan and helped make that
party sort of the anchor of the Japanese
political system for a generation
as I mentioned involved in regime change
in Chile in the 1967 the 74 --is-- the
agency was involved in supporting
military current Colonels part of a
hunter regime that most of the world
shunned in Greece there was attempted
regime change in Nicaragua and then an
episode that Americans are surprisingly
unaware of but from 1991 to 2003 there
was a failed consistent and extremely
expensive we're talking tens of millions
of dollars effort to promote regime
change in Iraq and I put the word covert
in quotes here because it actually was
the least covert operation in American
history because in 1998 the US Congress
passed a law called the Iraqi liberation
act which made it the law of the land
that we would overthrow the government
of Iraq so all these things kind of
raised questions for us now as you see I
put the little squiggly mark before all
my dates and things as an indicator that
the details are very murky right we
don't know a lot of stuff the CIA
doesn't really like to open up its
documents say welcome please look right
but on a few cases we know a lot we know
a lot we know a lot about Iran and
Guatemala and we know a lot about Chile
and so what I'm gonna do today is I'm
going to look at those three cases and
try to give us a sense of what do we
know and what can we learn from these
experiences and I think
one of the things we need to keep in
mind is that as historians are first and
foremost job or our most difficult job
is not to cast moral judgment that's
easy it's easy to say something
that happened in the past was wrong or
foolish or immoral but it's much more
difficult to take the pass on its own
terms to ask why something happened and
to try to learn something about
ourselves in our national history by
asking that question why so that's what
I'd like to try to do today as we look
through some of the key moments in the
history of regime change and the CIA but
first let's sort of start at the
beginning with the creation of the
agency the agency was created by an act
of Congress the National Security Act in
1947 and the legislation basically gave
the CIA two tasks one of them is very
easy to find it was charged with
collecting and analyzing intelligence
information
the basic goal was we had Pearl Harbor
colossal intelligence failure we should
not have that again the second part of
the legislation I quoted for you here
the National Security Act authorized the
CIA to quote do such other functions and
duties related to intelligence affecting
national security as the National
Security Council may from time to time
direct right how would you guys
characterize this language
Vegh right so that's kind of an easy one
right right this is the most perhaps the
most general statute in the American
Legislative record right basically says
the CIA can do whatever the National
Security Council which is an arm of the
president directs it to do and the
reason why they didn't say the president
is because they had this doctrine of
plausible deniability so the president
could say well I didn't necessarily do
it it was the National Security Council
that was involved now let's turn to our
first case the Iran coup of 1953 and I
have here first of all a map of Iran in
case you guys forgot where it's located
but second of all I have a secret
document here that tell that it is
actually drawn from the CIA archives
that was an early planning document for
the for the events that became the coup
of 1953 and as you can see the directive
was quite simple melodic who is the
premier prime minister of Iran must go
right now how do we get to this point we
actually have to go back pretty far to
kind of understand the context we have
to go back to 1901 and we have to
actually talk about the British Empire
the roots of what would become the
courtesy is poo and Iran can be traced
to a sort of single fateful decision
main and made in 1901 at that time the
Iranian government which is ruled by
sort of a monarchy known as the kadjar
dynasty made a deal with a very wealthy
British financier William Knox Darcy and
basically the deal was this Darcy would
get the rights and the British would get
the rights to explore and discover
exploit the petroleum resources that
they thought existed in Iran at the time
and if anything would happen to be found
the Iranians would get 16% of the
profits and the British would get the
rest a few years later in 1908 oil after
actually after drilling a lot of wells
that went nowhere they indeed struck oil
and in 1909 the anglo-persian oil
company was found and it was later
renamed the anglo-iranian oil company
and then still much later actually at
the end of my story today renamed
British Petroleum
now over the years the British Empire
became more and more dependent on
Iranian oil right right the British
power was rooted in the British Navy and
the British Navy converted to right oil
powered ships gasoline powered ships all
right and in addition Iranian petroleum
sort of fueled the high living standards
of the British population back home and
what the British did is they made sort
of a series of deals that gave the UK
increasing influence over Iranian
affairs and one of those important
moments came in 1919 when they signed
the anglo-persian agreement and
basically what this agreement did it was
a mutual agreement but it effectively
turned over control over an army its
Treasury its transportation system and
its communication network to the British
government right and this was what we
call informal Empire at work right now
in contrast right to sort of formal
Empire where you sort of imagine Darth
Vader going in and exerting total
control over the side society that is
beneath it right
informal Empire is one in which you kind
of let the people do what they want
within certain boundaries right and in
this case those boundaries were
basically everything that mattered
military and security affairs and
economic affairs right well than that we
don't really care what you do as long as
our interests our economic interests are
protected now as you can imagine this
arrangement provoked recurring tension
between Iranians and the British these
tensions became especially pronounced
after there was a political change in
Iran that overthrew the previous dynasty
and brought to power
razorsharp olivey who pronounced himself
Shah which is sort of the Persian word
for King and he was in power from 1925
to 1941 he was a strong ruler and a
reformer and like others that you've
talked about so far he sought to
modernize Iran he also sought to try to
get a better deal from the British and
he sort of had these recurring
negotiations back and forth he made a
little bit of progress but not a lot but
in any case by 1941 the British had had
enough of him in part because during the
war he became cozy with the Germans
which you
no the Nazis it's not very good and it
also had something to do with the fact
that he was an increasing thorn in the
side of the British leaders and so they
basically said you have to go and they
put in power his son Mohammad Reza Shah
Pahlavi who was shava ran from 1941 to
1979 with some interruption in between
that will kind of talk about now
Mohammad Reza Shah the British liked him
because he was much more compliant he
was much more pliable and in fact the
Iranian press sort of derided him and
made fun of him called him a Lackey of
the British alright but he was
effectively sort of a client ruler right
and this was part of how informal Empire
also worked we put our guy in and we got
the stuff that we wanted out you know he
got to run around have parties and big
parades and stuff lived a pretty decent
life and the British got to protect
their interests now a major source of
tension in Iran throughout this period
were conditions at the abadan refinery
located here in southern Iran near the
border with Iraq the abadan refinery was
a massive complex it was the biggest oil
refinery in the world but the conditions
there were deplorable especially for the
workers now in one hand you had the sort
of British engineers and managers who
lived in these opulent estates with
manicured gardens and swimming pools and
all this stuff and just down the road
were the shanty town that the workers
lived in it was literally a slum there
was no running water or electricity
a lot of the dwellings were made out of
oil drums that have been pounded thin
and sort of changed into sort of house
like structures and you can imagine what
those pounded oil drums were like in the
dead of the summer right people baked
like ovens in the winter right not a lot
of insulation is provided by this kind
of dwelling and so what they did is they
actually had huge warehouses where the
workers would move in and live
you'd have thousands of people two to
three thousand people living this one
big room basically like an aircraft
hangar and each individual family would
get a space of its own about the size of
a blanket with no privacy
train etc now in 1946 the workers at
Abaddonn went on strike they demanded
better housing decent health care and
better working conditions and this was
sort of the beginning of a major
confrontation between the British and
the Iranians the Iranian parliament
called the Majlis began to assert itself
and the sort of Shahs autocratic rule
began to kind of come unwind where I
began to loosen as the Democratic
Parliament became more influential and
it began to pressure the British
government for better treatment for
Iranian workers and a more equitable
share of the profits one of the demands
was they wanted to be able to split the
profits 50/50 between the British and
the Iranians and they also were
disturbed by a practice of which
technically the British said we'll give
you 16 percent I think actually by this
point is 21 percent of the profits but
they didn't let anyone audit the books
so you had to kind of take their word
that this was they were getting their
fair share for many Iranians the
anglo-iranian oil company or a IOC was
the symbol the very symbol of British
imperialism is also a symbol of their
own sort of helplessness and in subject
to colonial domination and what within
the Parliament one man emerged as the
voice of this newly energized Iranian
nationalism that was challenging British
supremacy in the country and that man
was Mohammed Mossadegh in 1951 he was
widely of in a very popular election
elected the prime minister and in large
part because he pledged to stand up to
the a IOC the Iranian anglo-iranian oil
company and in fact he was so popular
that the Shah became nervous and
basically handed the Premiership which
is like the head of state over to
Mossadegh and actually if you shortly
thereafter he flees the country he sort
of sees himself as basically being put
out of power by Mossadegh popularity
multidex first act which was supported
by the Parliament was actually to
nationalize the arraign anglo-iranian
oil company right nationalized means it
no longer belongs to you British people
belongs to us and he would pay them for
it and it's actually this is technically
permissible under an international law
but you can imagine that neither the
British government nor the a IOC were
particularly happy about this turn of
events and a huge standoff ensues right
now one of the things the British did is
they tried to put the economic squeeze
on Mossadegh and so one of the things
they did was they took all their
technicians and engineers and withdrew
them from the country now do I have any
petroleum engineers in the crowd today
thinking about it so I'm going to put
you on the spot what would happen to a
very large refinery complex if you took
out all the engineers it would sit there
absolutely right right so what ends up
happening is basically the Iranians are
unable to do anything about their oil
wealth right they're unable to do the
basic things you need to extract and
refine the petroleum in addition the
British put a de-facto blockade on the
selling of Iranian oil they did other
measures that effectively brought the
Iranian economy to a standstill
and things start unraveling very quickly
but most attack didn't budge as the
crisis dragged on the British got more
and more frustrated by the fact they're
putting the squeeze on but Mossadegh is
not relenting and so they start
developing plans to overthrow Mosaddegh
their plans were ruined when Mossadegh
learned of it and kicked all the British
diplomats diplomats out of the country
so the British turned to the United
States and began lobbying the newly
created CIA to join with them in an
operation to overthrow prime prime
minister Mossadegh now the British knew
right this is the height of the Cold War
and the British knew there was a simple
argument that they needed to make in
order to get the Americans Playball
described Mossadegh as a communist
stooge right and so they begin passing
on intelligence information suggesting
alarming information suggesting that
Mossadegh was a tool of the Kremlin an
agent of communist influence now what
they didn't say and this is very curious
they didn't actually say that Mossadegh
was a communist right because everyone
knew that he wasn't but they said he was
going to pave the way
communist domination of his country and
they pointed to things like he had a
couple of Communists in his government
and he allowed the commie of the Iranian
Communist Party which was called the two
day party to operate freely in the
country and they said these are eggs and
he was also reasonably nice to the
Russians and all these things added up
to evidence that he was going to pave
the way for communist influence which
very strategically located country with
large petroleum reserves right next to a
lot of other countries with large
petroleum reserves huge alarm bells go
off in Washington the United States
government goes into a state of virtual
panic they these arguments were sort of
got a receptive ear in the new American
president that was elected in 1953
President Dwight Eisenhower
and that year he ordered approval of
operation Ajax operation Ajax was led by
a guy known with by the name of Kermit
Roosevelt a CIA operative known as
Kermit Roosevelt he was the grandson of
Theodore Roosevelt but absolutely no
relation to the Frog yes I've made that
joke roughly 792 times
okay now the plan that that Kermit
Roosevelt developed in Kesser do you
think there's any strong evidence that
there I mean was kind of some
involvement between Iran and the Soviets
at the time or was that all just kind of
British made-up stuff it was it was the
preponderance of the evidence suggests
it was wildly exaggerated
so most of X biggest sin was not in
clamping down on the to debt party the
Communist Party of Iran but historians
have unearthed no sort of meaningful
evidence linking or sort of linking him
directly with the Soviet leadership or
sort of suggesting that he was an agent
or somehow a crony of the Kremlin now
the plan for operation Ajax was
basically the plan that would be
followed in many other similar
operations they would wage an extensive
propaganda campaign against Mossadegh to
undermine his leadership under-
credibility they would organize a
campaign of economic sabotage right when
things go bad economically people get
upset and they start blaming people
we've seen this and they did things like
pay cash money and they had a lot of it
to spread around cash money to basically
goons and thugs to stir up trouble and
including among them sort of more
humorous ones were circus performers and
weight lifters who were given chunks of
cash to sort of go out and create havoc
in the streets of Tehran crates are
actually kind of a very funny image but
now this was a formula that they applied
elsewhere right trigger economic arrests
unrest trigger a crisis and make things
so bad
that the military would step in to
impose order right now a key element of
the plot was at the CIA and in fact
Kermit Roosevelt here in particular had
to convince Mohammad Reza Shah who had
fled the country they had to convince
him to sign a document dismissing
Mossadegh and then they had to convince
him to come back in and this was
actually kind of a hard sell because the
Shah was kind of not the strongest and
most brave of characters so ultimately
the agency got the army onboard they or
the army arrested Mossadegh and the Shah
returned to Iran in triumph and here
well here you can see him stepping off
the airplane shortly after he landed he
turns to komen Kermit Roosevelt and says
to him I owe my throne to God my people
my army and to you now what's the legacy
of all this well there's a part of the
port an economic legacy all right and
one thing is that the Shah makes a new
deal with the international oil
companies and basically the Iranians say
we're going to split the oil profits
that come out of our country
on a 50/50 basis 50% will go to us the
government Iran and 50% will go to an
international consortium which will in
turn distribute them among themselves
and according to this deal British
Petroleum which was the a IOC and
actually consumed you're changing the
signs British Petroleum would get 40% US
companies will get 40% and other
European companies would get 20% now if
you sort of look at this right the
British now the sort of irony here is
the British got
much worse deal if they had simply said
to most of that way back when we'll
split it with it we'll deal with that
consequence right now they're getting
instead of 50/50 they're getting forty
percent of fifty percent right and the
more important legacy is now the
American petroleum industry and American
security is now linked as well to
Iranian petroleum there was another
legacy as well and that is one American
president after another courted courted
the Shah of Iran they provided him with
arms and economic aid and they trained
his secret police every now and then the
secret police was called savaii was very
brutal they had all kinds of torture
chambers and the usual things that
secret police do and every now and then
American president would say please
don't be so horrible and the Shah would
say why don't you give me more money and
the Americans would say well you should
be less horrible he says well if you
don't give me more money I'm going to
turn to the Russians and then they'd
given more money and this is sort of a
current recurring pattern that played
out now under the Shah Iran became a
pillar of US influence in the Middle
East until everything exploded in 1979
and indeed one of the main reasons that
Iranian stormed the embassy in 1979 was
because they were afraid the Americans
would do it again let's turn to another
case Guatemala 1954 located in Central
America
just south of Mexico and not it not
terribly far from the country of Cuba
now at the center of the story in
Guatemala was a figure by the name of
jacobo rbenz guzmn popularly known as
our Benz
now our bands had been a colonel in the
Army in Guatemala and he participated in
the Guatemalan revolution in 1944 that
had swept aside a hated dictator and put
in place a sort of sowed the seeds for
the potential of a long-running
Guatemalan democracy oh by our Benz
himself was democratically elected in
1951 and this was the first peaceful
transfer of power in Guatemala's history
now as president our bands laid out
three objectives for his country first
economic independence second economic
development and third raise living
standards for the people fight poverty
in his country now to him all of these
were about removing the vestiges of
colonialism that were a product of
foreign domination of Guatemala's
economy but they clashed very
significantly with powerful foreign
owned economic interests you had
electric bond and share which basically
was a foreign company that controlled
the entire electrical system in
Guatemala you had international railways
of Central America which controlled the
entire rail system which is an
effectively complete control of the
transportation system and then most
importantly you have not United Fruit
Company which was very influential in
bringing people the banana but was
actually an incredibly powerful force in
Guatemala United Fruit owned about 1/5
of the country's land arable land and it
was the largest landowner and the
largest employer in Guatemala it also
happened to own 46 percent of the stock
of international railways which gave it
a huge influence over the country's
transportation system our bends
challenged all of these interests he
proposed building a public electric
system to challenge the electric
monopoly he imposed investments in
transportation that would challenge the
transportation monopoly and he most
controversially he put forward a plan of
land redistribution he basically said it
passed actually passed a law that was
unanimously passed by the Guatemalan
Parliament that said we're going to take
any huge tract of land that is not
cultivated not currently being used and
we're going to cut it up and we're going
to give it to poor peasants so that they
could have their own farm plots and
economic independence this posed a huge
problem for United Fruit not only did it
own 1/5 of the land but it actually only
cultivated 15 percent of it right so
that means under this law basically the
Ottoman government is going to
expropriate take away 85% of the land
held by United Fruit now they didn't do
this without offering compensation and
our Benz was very smart he offered to
pay them 1.1 85 million dollars for the
land which was this sum that United
Fruit had declared for tax purposes for
those of you ever paid your tax taxes
you may know that sometimes the value we
put on things for tax purposes not
exactly the value of things as they are
United fruits all these things as a huge
assault on its position in Guatemala and
on its potential for profits and it
reacted with a vengeance and first thing
I tried to do is stir up opposition to
you - to our bends within the United
States so they hired the best and most
influential public relations agent in
the history of the United States a guy
by the name of Edward Bernays he had
sort of basically invented or certainly
perfected the practice of propaganda and
public relations and he stirred up all
kinds of press stories and things
dramatizing presenting our bends as a
tool of the communists the company also
had two very powerful friends in the
United States government one of them was
John Foster Dulles the American
Secretary of State who had served as a
very influential international lawyer
and had represented United Fruit for
many years and the other was his brother
Allen Dulles who just happened to be
director of the CIA and had also
represented United Fruit as a lawyer and
owned a lot of United Fruit stock the
two men effectively convinced President
Eisenhower to again Oh or approve a
covert operation this time operation
pbsuccess
and the goal was to overthrow our bends
the plan was very similar to the one in
Iran the CIA put the economic squeeze on
guatemala - so domestic unrest there was
an extensive propaganda campaign
including a black propaganda stations
and a plan that used catholic priests in
guatemala to give sermons and distribute
pamphlets talking about how our bands
was a day
danger to the faith and an evil to God
it also courted friends in the
Guatemalan army and their most important
contact was Colonel Carlos Castillo
Armas now at the time he was a former
Guatemalan army officer who was living
in Honduras the CIA found him offered to
put him in power and provided him with
arms money and a private army together
with the CIA they they launched these
bombing raids on Guatemala City using
American aircraft the purpose of which
was to stimulate terror and panic and it
worked when the smoke had cleared our
Benz agreed to resign at gunpoint and he
was replaced by the CIA's chosen man
Carlos Castillo Armas now one of his
first acts was to round up supporters of
our bands and get rid of them and here's
actually a CIA cable that has since been
Declassified explaining that they're
providing lists of persons to be
disposed of right and those lists fell
into two categories category what
category one was persons to be spoke
disposed of through executive action
right the CIA's euphemism for
assassination now we don't exactly know
again because of the limits of the
documentation what role exactly the CIA
played in the assassinations and
targeted killings that followed but we
know certainly that they planned it and
that this information was communicated
to our bins our mas by now you should
see a pattern and it repeated itself in
Chile in 1970 in the 1970 right and
again we have a pretty decent array of
classified documents that tell us what
took place right and here you can see a
cable from Washington to the CIA station
arguing that it is firm and continuing
policy policy that Ayen day be
overthrown by a coup again the key key
figure at play here was a leftist
reformer Salvador Allende again he
challenged powerful foreign
economic interests which he saw as a
form of economic domination economic
colonialism of his country now but in
contrast in the situations in Iran in
Guatemala the situation a little bit
more complicated because this case the
CIA pledged to determine to overthrow
Allende before he had even taken power
and that requires two sort of understand
that curious turn of logic we have to
explain a little bit of what that means
so the Chilean political system often
has multi-party candidates it would have
a long constitutional tradition and
typically if a candidate did not win a
majority of votes the Chilean Congress
would have to certify the election
basically ratify the results as it
turned out a yen day in 1971 thirty-six
percent and so the Chilean Congress had
a fixed period of time in which to
certify the results and pronounced him
as president the CIA decided early on
that it wanted to stop that from
happening
why did it do so well a key figure
decided that it was in the US interests
to make sure that a yen day did not take
power interestingly enough that key
figure also won an American political
election with three candidates and did
not win a majority of votes that person
was Richard Nixon and again powerful
economic interests and personal
connections to the White House played a
role and there was a key operator here a
guy by the name of Donald Kendall
pictured here on the left and what he's
doing is actually pouring the leader a
Pepsi Cola for the leader of the Soviet
Union Nikita Khrushchev when Richard
Nixon was vice president and spending a
little time in Moscow now what happened
here well Kendall was the CEO of Pepsi
and he was the principal distributor of
Pepsi Cola in Chile he had ties to some
of the most richest and most powerful
people in the country and one of his
friends in contacts was Chile's richest
man a guy by the name of Agustin Edwards
who controlled the largest and most
influential newspaper in the country he
was kind of like the Rupert Murdoch of
Chile Edwards had a panic attack when a
yen day was elected he travelled to
watch
ten met with Kendall said Kendall you
have got to meet with Nixon Nick Kendall
picks up the phone and schedules an
appointment with the President of the
United States this is a sign you have
some connections right I've tried you
know the scheduled appointments before
it hasn't really panned out very well
so Kendall meets president personally
with President Nixon to discuss the
situation and says a yen day is a
communist stooge who's going to wreak
havoc on all our interests in Chile
after the meeting ends Nixon holds
another meeting later that day with
Henry Kissinger his national security
adviser and with Richard Helms the CIA
director and we actually have we don't
have the complete record of what was
discussed there it was only a 13 minute
meeting but we have the handwritten
notes composed by Rick Richard Helms the
CIA director of that meeting and it's
all chicken scratch so I transcribed it
over here on your left right and this is
what he's taking notes as he's meeting
with Nixon for those 13 minutes he says
one in ten chance perhaps but save Chile
worth spending not concerned no
involvement of the embassy ten million
available more if necessary full-time
job best men we have game plan make the
economy scream 48 hours for plan of
action right in other words this is the
marching orders right and it has
tremendous urgency right right get going
get this thing moving now why would the
American government care so much about
an election of Chile in fact Henry
Kissinger had one sort of derided Chile
as a heart of Antarctica right it was a
sign that maybe he didn't consider the
most vital interest of the United States
okay in case you guys don't know
Antarctica big frozen continent you know
a lot of penguins bucha again we see
that economic interests are pivotal
right Chile was the leading producer of
copper and to American companies
Kennecott Copper and anaconda copper
dominated the mining industry in Chile
most of Chile's
export revenues came from the copper
mining and fully one-third of the
government's tax revenues came from
these two companies alone in addition
you also had international telephone and
telegraph or ITT which controlled the
country's communication system ITT
viewed a yen day as a grave threat they
was afraid you're going to take over the
telecommunications industry and they
were so upset that they actually
communicated to Richard Nixon and the US
government that they would give the US
government a million dollars to
overthrow Allende right this is a sign
that corporate interests were very very
concerned so initially the CIA approves
this plan and initially pursues the
first tract which is simply to prevent
the Chilean Congress from ratifying a
yen days election that plan was
unsuccessful the Congress proceeded as
planned and the CIA turned to track to
foment a military coup now what's
interesting about the case in Chile was
actually how difficult it was to foment
a coup to foment a military coup Chile
had a long tradition of constitutional
governance and a sort of tradition of
separating military from political
affairs much the way that the Americans
also celebrate such a tradition and they
had trouble convincing military officers
to stage a coup d'etat to reverse that
tradition so the agency calculated it
needed to create a serious economic
crisis in order to convince the military
to intervene the basic plan was if Chile
felled into Syria fell into serious
economic decline there would be chaos
and that would prompt a military coup to
restore order so they did things like
cancel all US aid to Chile they had a
Chili's credit rating / so they could
get no loans it funneled 3.5 million
dollars to opposition parties and two
allied organizations it spent two
million dollars on a propaganda campaign
sent one and a half million dollars to
business groups labor groups and
paramilitary organizations to organize
protests and riots and strikes they
organized a huge transportation strike
where the the Truckers trucking industry
came to a standstill people couldn't get
food
created this huge economic crisis and it
was supported by the American business
community which created an ad hoc
working group to coordinate measures to
bring the Chilean economy to a
standstill while all this was going on a
yen day convinced the Chilean Congress
to nationalize that is take over the
copper industry as well as to take over
control over ITT now the CIA continued
to have a difficult time overthrowing
Allende in large part because the head
of the Chilean army a guy by the name of
General Rene Schneider refused to
intervene he sort of had too much
respect for the Chilean constitutional
system so the CIA arranged to have him
kidnapped and in the process he was a
yin de managed to hold on to power until
that fateful day of September 11th 1973
so what do we learn from all these
episodes I haven't been skipping head
well one thing that was when some of the
some of this information was made public
in the mid-1970s one of the charges that
emerged what that was that the CIA was a
rogue agency it was a rogue elephant it
was like a big Colossus just running
around sowing chaos and madness without
any oversight or authorization but that
actually misses the point all of these
operations were ordered by a
democratically elected American
president and all of them were
effectively in line with US law right
the agency as we know did a lot of
things actually were illegal during the
Cold War but fomenting unrest
subsidizing newspapers in propaganda
distributing cash and weapons to rebels
orchestrating the overthrow of foreign
governments all of these were
permissible under US law so it becomes
sort of difficult to make the case that
the CIA was a rogue agency the more
interesting thing we need to think about
is what are the implications about
Congress delegating an extraordinary
amount of power to a secret agency
that's unaccountable to the American
electorate
second question emerge were these
success stories and I often have my
students in other classes that I've
taught that have been all about the CIA
I've had them write essays about what
were these operations successful and the
answer is that students usually write is
that yes and no on the one hand there
were a short-term success in Iran the
United States got a dependable client
state for 26 years all right it got what
it wanted got a toehold in the Iranian
petroleum it had a close ally it had a
strategic position nine but on the other
hand over the long term these operations
not only sort of perpetuated
disappearances and murder these are the
picture here are the victims of some of
the victims of Pinochet regime but also
anti Americanism radicalism and a sense
of distrust of American power right it's
not uncommon for foreigners to see this
hand of the CIA in everything that goes
sort of amiss right even when the CIA is
not in fact involved right there's
actually sort of bizarre tendency to
exaggerate the power of the CIA I've
sort of given you the three most
dramatic cases but if I scroll back in
my slides to that image I showed you at
the beginning you'll remember that I
talked about there are a lot of cases of
failed attempts botched attempts or
things that didn't quite work out the
way we had planned in addition there's
also an important trend that connects to
a larger conflict that's going on in
world history in the modern world at
this time and it's a larger battle over
economic resources in the 20th century
and as I've tried to emphasize you can't
understand the these operations without
understanding the economic conditions
that were at play note that in all of
the cases the key factor that triggers
the crisis is the nationalization or the
threat of nationalization of powerful
industries right for Mossadegh it was
the anglo-iranian oil company for our
bends it was United Fruit for a yen day
it was the mining companies and ITT and
what you had is you had effectively two
Titanic and opposing forces at play here
on the one hand you had big foreign
companies that have invested huge
amounts of money in the development of
these industries and expected and felt
holdin to their stockholders to secure
the profits that come from those
investments and on the other hand the
very power in influence of those
companies helped foster nationalist
movements right nationalist leaders in
the third world like Mossadegh our benz
and our yen day argued that their
resources should benefit their people
and they also argued that foreign
control over those resources undermined
their sovereignty and perpetuated
poverty right and so here we can see
salvador allende speaking to the united
nations shortly before he's deposed he
summarizes the sort of general sentiment
within third-world nationalism our
economy could no longer tolerate the
subordination implied by having more
than 80 percent of its exports in the
hands of a small group of large foreign
companies right and so for him the
question was really about sovereignty as
well as about poverty now the great sort
of tragedy of all this was that in both
sides of this struggle industry and the
nationalists could not find common
ground a solution that would keep them
both from going to the brink now the
third thing we can sort of gather from
all this is sort of a sort of an
understanding of why Americans operated
in the way that they did during the Cold
War and one of the most sort of powerful
things to emerge from Cold War history
is that Americans tended to confuse
nationalism with communism there was
sort of an assumption that anywhere
there was trouble around the world right
here you can see Joseph Stalin with his
tentacles going into going into the
trouble all the trouble spots of the
world there is an assumption that
wherever there was trouble
the evil hand of the Kremlin must be at
work and so nationalism they saw such
things as land distribution in the
nationalization of industries as being
the first steps toward a communist
takeover these must have been
masterminded by Moscow now historians
have pored over these episodes and
they've sort of dissected them you know
to the point of ridiculousness and they
found no meaningful evidence linking
Mossadegh our bends or Allende to the
Soviet Union none of these guys was
tools of the Kremlin but Americans had
difficulty
seen the nuance of what was it play
but actually what's even more remarkable
is if you look at the classified
documents and US archives you'll see
that Americans actually kind of sort of
knew that their assumptions were wrong
many intelligence analysts would say
things like Mossadegh may not have been
a communist but he was going to lead to
a communist takeover our bends probably
wasn't a communist but he was going to
pave the way for a communist takeover a
yen day probably not a communist but
going to lead to a communist takeover
right and this kind of raises a question
did Americans not understand third world
nationalism or did they not want to
understand third world nationalism
Richard Helms at one point hinted that
perhaps he knew the answer Cobb
reflecting back on the event in Chile
that he helped orchestrate he said we
did not choose to know so we did not
know how much we did not know now the
last thing that sort of explains these
operations was what could be called a
total war mindset that took place during
the Cold War
and here I've just opposed a propaganda
poster from World War two with a
propaganda poster from the Cold War
period these kinds of operations stemmed
from a mindset that viewed the Cold War
as effectively as the same thing as
total war that had preceded it world war
two in the Cold War just kind of blended
together one guy said after World War
two the fighting continued just the
names had changed and that kind of
symbolized in many ways how the
Americans looked at the world and they
believed that the enemy was ruthless and
would employ any tactics to win and
therefore that the United States should
be just as ruthless as their opponent a
CIA director Richard Helms talked about
this the ways in which World War two in
the Cold War became meshed together he
said in world war two we knew what our
motivation was to beat the goddamn Nazis
in the Cold War we knew what our
motivation was to beat the goddamn
Russians right you get this sort of in
the simplicity of it you can see how
those two become intertwined right and
you also get a sense of how the sort of
moral calculus rested
a decision that we have to fight fire
with fire so for example here's a quote
from a top-secret report compiled by
james Doolittle on intelligence
activities for President Eisenhower 1954
and you'll find this quote cited in
basically every book every book ever
written by the CIA about the CIA and the
report points out it is now clear that
we are facing an implacable enemy who's
a valid objective is world domination by
whatever means and at whatever cost
there are no rules in such a game
hitherto
acceptable norms of human conduct do not
apply if the United States is to survive
we must learn to subvert sabotage and
destroy our enemies by more clever more
sophisticated and more effective methods
than those used against us right and
otherwise the basic logic is to defeat
the enemy we have to become them we to
fight fire we have to use fire right
some people have pointed out that
sometimes it's better to fight fire with
water thank you very much
I know you guys have to go to class but
anyone have any burning questions yes
right here on that kind of complete list
you showed us of times where the CIA was
involved in at least attempted to take
over and how many of those cases were
their actual Soviet involvement and how
many were there's kind of suspected
Soviet involvement and how many like
neither yeah so I haven't done the sort
of strict calculus sort of adding up the
numbers but we find in most cases is
that there is the sort of larger
blurring of assumptions right there were
often what we call local communist
movements were sort of took sort of
inspiration from Marxist resistance to
imperialism as they saw it but an
American sort of assumed if there's a
communist in Indonesia he must be
controlled by Moscow and that was the
assumption that was wrong in almost
every single case that the reality was
is that these were people who were
motivated by senses of economic justice
sometimes concern for their own power
but they were not fundamentally
controlled by Moscow and so sometimes
the Russians would capitalize on this
right they would send money or sort of
extend moral support but there have been
really no meaningful cases except within
the immediate borders of the Soviet
Union in Eastern Europe where you see
evidence of the Soviets directly
inspiring these and fomenting these
rebellions any other questions all right
well I know you've got to go so thanks a
lot
oh I forgot to take a break
I forgot to point out my